I can't count the number of times that
I've seen or heard the claim that it's
essentially impossible for someone with
NPD to heal. That is to move from
borderline to neurotic level. But once
you understand what a personality
disorder actually is, the path to
healing becomes remarkably clear. At its
core, treatment is the performance of
essential caregiving functions by the
therapist while simultaneously
acknowledging that the therapist can
never truly provide what the patient did
not receive in early development. This
paradoxical coexistence of two seemingly
contradictory truths that the therapist
both provides and does not provide what
was missing is precisely the dynamic
that underpins the depressive position.
The capacity to hold contradictory
emotional truths is the very hallmark of
mature psychological functioning. Author
Steven Johnson refers to this kind of
transformation as the hard work miracle.